[DOCS] Troubleshoot the flood-stage watermark error (#78519)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/how-to/fix-common-cluster-issues.asciidoc

[[fix-common-cluster-issues]]
== Fix common cluster issues

This guide describes how to fix common errors and problems with {es} clusters.

[discrete]
=== Error: disk usage exceeded flood-stage watermark, index has read-only-allow-delete block

This error indicates a data node is critically low on disk space and has reached
the <<cluster-routing-flood-stage,flood-stage disk usage watermark>>. When a
node reaches this watermark, {es} blocks writes to any index with a shard on the
node to prevent a full disk. If the block affects related system indices, {kib}
and other {stack} features may become unavailable.

{es} will automatically remove the write block when the affected node goes below
the <<cluster-routing-watermark-high,high disk watermark>>. To achieve this,
{es} automatically moves some of the affected node's shards to other nodes in

> the data tier. However, {es} will only allocate shards to nodes below the high

Reviewer: s/high/low/ here.

```suggestion
the data tier. However, {es} will only allocate shards to nodes whose disk usage is below the low
```

Also there may be other reasons it can't allocate shards to other nodes, e.g. they're in the wrong data tier or there's an allocation filter, or allocation awareness prevents it, or ...

Author: Good point and thanks for catching my error re: the high/low watermarks. I think just pointing folks to the cat allocation API will suffice here.

disk usage watermark.

> To verify that some nodes in the tier are below the high disk watermark, use the

Reviewer: I'd generally tell folks to jump straight to the allocation explain API first. They can check `_cat/allocation` if allocation explain says all the nodes are full, but there may be other reasons the shards aren't moving which `_cat/allocation` won't explain.

<<cat-allocation,cat allocation API>> to get each node's disk usage percentage
(`disk.percent`) and current available disk space (`disk.avail`).

[source,console]
----
GET _cat/allocation?v=true
----

To check that shards are moving from the affected node to other nodes, use the
<<cat-shards,cat shards API>>. If {es} can't allocate a shard to another node,

> the shard has a `state` of `UNASSIGNED`. The `unassigned.reason` describes why

Reviewer: If Elasticsearch can't move shards then they won't be `UNASSIGNED`, they'll stay assigned wherever they are. Also the `unassigned.reason` is rarely helpful in this situation, it really only describes why the shard became unassigned in the first place and doesn't usually say anything about how to fix it.

the shard remains unassigned.

[source,console]
----
GET _cat/shards?v=true&h=index,shard,prirep,state,node,unassigned.reason&s=state
----

To get a more in-depth explanation of an unassigned shard's allocation status,
use the <<cluster-allocation-explain,cluster allocation explanation API>>.

[source,console]
----

> GET _cluster/allocation/explain?filter_path=index,node_allocation_decisions.node_name,node_allocation_decisions.deciders.*

Reviewer: I think folk should generally not use a `filter_path` like that and just get the whole output, there may be important details in the bits that this filter doesn't match.

[[fix-common-cluster-issues]]
== Fix common cluster issues

This guide describes how to fix common errors and problems with {es} clusters.

[discrete]
=== Error: disk usage exceeded flood-stage watermark, index has read-only-allow-delete block

This error indicates a data node is critically low on disk space and has reached
the <<cluster-routing-flood-stage,flood-stage disk usage watermark>>. When a
node reaches this watermark, {es} blocks writes to any index with a shard on the
node to prevent a full disk. If the block affects related system indices, {kib}
and other {stack} features may become unavailable.

You can use the <<cat-allocation,cat allocation API>> to get the current
available disk space (`disk.avail`) and disk usage percentage (`disk.percent`)
for each node.

[source,console]
----
GET _cat/allocation?v=true
----

> {es} will automatically remove the write block when the node goes below the

Reviewer: Could we also mention that Elasticsearch will be working to move shards away from the overfull node until it drops below the high watermark, assuming there's somewhere else to put them? Ideally users should check that shards really are moving onto the other nodes, and if they're not then they should use the cluster allocation explain API to understand why not.

[[fix-common-cluster-issues]]
== Fix common cluster issues

This guide describes how to fix common errors and problems with {es} clusters.

[discrete]
=== Error: disk usage exceeded flood-stage watermark, index has read-only-allow-delete block

This error indicates a data node is critically low on disk space and has reached
the <<cluster-routing-flood-stage,flood-stage disk usage watermark>>. To prevent
a full disk, when a node reaches this watermark, {es} blocks writes to any index
with a shard on the node. If the block affects related system indices, {kib} and
other {stack} features may become unavailable.

{es} will automatically remove the write block when the affected node's disk
usage goes below the <<cluster-routing-watermark-high,high disk watermark>>. To
achieve this, {es} automatically moves some of the affected node's shards to

> other nodes in the data tier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other nodes in the same data tier.
```

> To verify that shards are moving off the affected node, use the

Reviewer: I think you probably can't verify this with the allocation explain API alone, you'd generally have to start with `_cat/shards` or similar.

Author: Thanks @DaveCTurner. I re-added docs for the `_cat/shards` and delete index APIs with 2c8ed6c0a277e8274715cd671a8064a75cfe9475.

POST my-index/_shrink/my-shrunken-index
----
// TEST[s/^/PUT my-index\n{"settings":{"index.number_of_shards":2,"blocks.write":true}}\n/]

> // end::free-up-disk-space[]

Reviewer: Force-merging will probably make the disk usage worse since it has to write the new segments before it can delete the old ones. Deleting unneeded indices is the only way really.
